Add documentation about integration tests (#1426)
JetBrains/intellij-sdk-docs: topics/basics/testing_plugins/integration_tests/integration_tests_intro.md

> <!-- Copyright 2000-2024 JetBrains s.r.o. and contributors. Use of this source code is governed by the Apache 2.0 license. -->

Reviewer: 2025

> 

Reviewer: please add excerpt https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/intellij/sdk-style.html#excerpt

> # Creating the first integration test

Reviewer 2: Please change it to "Introduction to Integration Tests"
Also, use Title Case in other sections.

> ## Why create integration tests?

Reviewer 2: Please replace this title with a simple introduction sentence that the list below completes.

* Testing complex scenarios: Some scenarios, particularly UI interactions, cannot be effectively covered by unit tests alone.
* Full product testing: Integration tests run against the complete product rather than isolated components. This helps identify issues that unit tests might miss, such as module interaction problems, classpath conflicts, and plugin declaration issues.
* User story validation: Integration tests typically mirror real user scenarios, ensuring your plugin works reliably from start to finish.

> Despite common perceptions, integration tests aren't as difficult to create as you might think! Let's explore how to set them up.

Reviewer: please avoid using _you_, _your_,_our_ etc. (see also below)

## Adding dependencies
Integration testing framework consists of two main components:
* **Starter**: Handles IDE configuration, test project setup, IDE startup, and output collection.

> * **Driver**: Provides additional functionality we'll explore in future blog posts.

Reviewer: we don't have blog posts here

The Starter framework exclusively supports JUnit 5, as it leverages JUnit 5's extensions and specialized listeners that aren't available in JUnit 4.

Add the following dependencies to your build.gradle.kts:
```kotlin
dependencies {

>     intellijPlatform {

Reviewer 2: Please format code with 2-spaces indentation.

        //...

>         testFramework(TestFrameworkType.Starter)

Reviewer 2: Please explain what dependencies it will add under the hood (in general, that it will add started, driver, anything else)?.

    }

    testImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.10.2")
    testImplementation("org.kodein.di:kodein-di-jvm:7.20.2")
}
```

> or if you don't use IntelliJ Gradle Platform Plugin:

Reviewer: please remove this whole section, we do not support "not" using Gradle plugin

testImplementation("com.jetbrains.intellij.driver:driver-sdk:LATEST-EAP-SNAPSHOT")
testImplementation("com.jetbrains.intellij.driver:driver-model:LATEST-EAP-SNAPSHOT")

// JUnit 5
testImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.10.2")
// Dependency Injection for Starter configuration
testImplementation("org.kodein.di:kodein-di-jvm:7.20.2")
```

Note: While `LATEST-EAP-SNAPSHOT` is available, you might prefer using specific release versions to ensure test stability. The framework follows the IntelliJ IDEA versioning scheme, for example:
`testImplementation("com.jetbrains.intellij.tools:ide-starter-squashed:243.23654.153")`.

Note:
* Use the same version across all framework libraries to avoid compatibility issues.
* As the Driver and UI components continue to evolve, we aim to keep the Starter API stable, with occasional breaking changes.

## Integrating Starter with IntelliJ Platform Gradle Plugin

To test your plugin, the Starter framework needs to know where to find your plugin distribution for installation in the IDE. This requires configuring your Gradle test task.

Add the following configuration to your `build.gradle.kts`:
```

> tasks.test {

Reviewer: is it intended to use `test` target here instead of introducing dedicated `integrationTest` or similar?

Author: All our examples as well as blog posts, lectures and talks are using `test` task. I would like to keep it that way to avoid discrepancies between different sources.

Reviewer: AFAIU the default setup for Gradle is this https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_testing.html#sec:configuring_java_integration_tests

    dependsOn("buildPlugin")
    systemProperty("path.to.build.plugin", tasks.buildPlugin.get().archiveFile.get().asFile.absolutePath)
    useJUnitPlatform()
}
```

This configuration does the following:
* Makes the test task depend on `buildPlugin`, ensuring your plugin is built before tests run.
* Sets the `path.to.build.plugin` system property to point to your plugin distribution file.
* Enables JUnit Platform for test execution.

## Creating the first test

Now that we've completed the configuration, let's write our first integration test, which will:
* Start the IDE with our plugin installed.
* Wait for all background processes to complete.
* Perform a shutdown.

> Create a new Kotlin file in `src/test/kotlin` with the following code:

Reviewer: integration tests should probably go into a dedicated source root folder

Author: All our examples as well as blog posts, lectures and talks are `test` folder so I would like to keep it that way to avoid discrepancies between different sources.  I think developers would be able to create their own folder if needed and it's perfectly fine combine integration and unit tests.

```kotlin
class PluginTest {

>    @Test

Reviewer 2: Please format code with 2-spaces indentation.

   fun simpleTestWithoutProject() {
      Starter.newContext(testName = "testExample", TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject).withVersion("2024.3")).apply {
         val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
         PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
      }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
      }
   }
}
```

Let's break down each part of the test:
### 1. Context creation
`Starter.newContext(testName = "testExample", TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject).withVersion("2024.3"))`

The Context object stores IDE runtime configuration:
* IDE type (e.g., IntelliJ Community, PhpStorm, GoLand).
* IDE version (2024.3 in this example).
* Project configuration (using NoProject for this example).
* Custom VM options, paths, and SDK settings.

The `testName` parameter defines the folder name for test artifacts, which is useful when running multiple IDE instances in a single test. We're using IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition version 2024.3, and we're starting the IDE without any project, so the welcome screen will be shown.

> ### 2. Plugin installation

Reviewer: please reformat the file with Writerside plugin enabled

```kotlin
.apply {
   val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
   PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
}
```

This step configures plugin installation using the plugin path we defined in our Gradle configuration.

Note: `PluginConfigurator` can install plugins from local paths or Marketplace.

### 3. IDE life cycle management
```kotlin
.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
}
```

These two methods:
* Start the IDE instance (`runIdeWithDriver`).
* Shut down the IDE (`useDriverAndCloseIde`).

The empty lambda is used for IDE interactions (`useDriverAndCloseIde`).

> Note: When you run the test for the first time, it may take longer than expected since it needs to download the IDE. Subsequent runs will be faster, using the cached IDE version.

Reviewer: use real callouts? https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/intellij/sdk-style.html#notes-and-callouts

Note: We added a call `waitForIndicators` into the lambda to make sure that we wait till all indicators are gone before exiting the IDE.

## How to catch exceptions from the IDE?
Our test has one critical limitation: it won't detect exceptions or freezes occurring within the IDE process. Let's understand why and how to fix this.

Due to the two-process architecture:
* Exceptions in the IDE process aren't automatically propagated to the test process.
* A bundled plugin collects exceptions from the IDE's `MessageBus`.
* These exceptions are stored in the error folder within the logs.

The Starter framework uses TeamCity reporting by default, falling back to `NoCIServer` for other environments. However, we can customize this behavior using Kodein Dependency Injection. Here's how to make tests fail when IDE exceptions occur:
```kotlin
init {
   di = DI {
      extend(di)
      bindSingleton<CIServer>(overrides = true) {
         object : CIServer by NoCIServer {
            override fun reportTestFailure(testName: String, message: String, details: String, linkToLogs: String?) {
               fail { "$testName fails: $message. \n$details" }
            }
         }
      }
   }
}
```

> ### How it works

Reviewer 2: I think this header is redundant. I suggest something like:
> In the code above:
> 1. A custom implementation of CIServer is created... It overrides NoCIServe...
> 2. Overridden `reportTestFailure()` will be called when... The implementation calls the `fail()` method in order to...

Or something similar.

}
```

We need to specify the following dependencies:

* `testFramework(TestFrameworkType.Starter)` will add all required dependencies for writing integration tests - Starter and Driver frameworks.
* `org.kodein.di:kodein-di-jvm` is a dependency injection framework used by Starter for configuration.
* `org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core-jvm` is required for Starter framework which is implemented using Kotlin coroutines.

This configuration does the following:

* Imports test implementation dependencies to intTest implementation dependencies
* Defines new test source roots in `src/intTest`
* Creates a new task `integrationTest` in `verification` group
* Makes the test task depend on `buildPlugin`, ensuring plugin is built before tests run.
* To test a plugin, the Starter framework needs to know where to find the plugin distribution for installation in the IDE. `path.to.build.plugin` system property points to the plugin distribution file.
* Enables JUnit Platform for test execution.

For more details about configuring integration tests, please refer to [Gradle docs](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_testing.html#sec:configuring_java_integration_tests).

> > Note: As the Driver and UI components continue to evolve, we aim to keep the Starter API stable, with occasional breaking changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> As the Driver and UI components continue to evolve, we aim to keep the Starter API stable, with occasional breaking changes.
```

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about this note. I feel it is contradicting: "we aim for stability, but we will break it anyway". Maybe skip the Starter API part?
> Please note that Driver and UI components are in the experimental state.

>
{style="note"}

## Creating the First Integration Test

> Now that we've completed the configuration, let's write our first integration test, which will:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After the configuration is completed, the second step is creating an integration test.
An example test scenario:
```

For consistency. In general, our doc style avoids being direct (you, your plugin, we).

* Start the IDE with our plugin installed.
* Wait for all background processes to complete.
* Perform a shutdown.

Create a new Kotlin file in `src/intTest/kotlin` with the following code:

```kotlin
class PluginTest {
  @Test
  fun simpleTestWithoutProject() {
    Starter.newContext(testName = "testExample", TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject).withVersion("2024.3")).apply {
      val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
      PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
    }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
    }
  }
}
```

Let's break down each part of the test:

### 1. Context creation

> `Starter.newContext(testName = "testExample", TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject).withVersion("2024.3"))`

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```kotlin
Starter.newContext(
  testName = "testExample",
  TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject
).withVersion("2024.3"))
```
````

The Context object stores IDE runtime configuration:

* IDE type (e.g., IntelliJ Community, PhpStorm, GoLand).
* IDE version (2024.3 in this example).
* Project configuration (using NoProject for this example).
* Custom VM options, paths, and SDK settings.

> The `testName` parameter defines the folder name for test artifacts, which is useful when running multiple IDE instances in a single test. We're using IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition version 2024.3, and we're starting the IDE without any project, so the welcome screen will be shown.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `testName` parameter defines the folder name for test artifacts, which is useful when running multiple IDE instances in a single test.
The test case uses IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition 2024.3, and the the IDE is started without any project, so the welcome screen will be shown.
```

### 2. Plugin installation

```kotlin
.apply {
  val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
  PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
}
```

> This step configures plugin installation using the plugin path we defined in our Gradle configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This step configures plugin installation using the plugin path defined in the Gradle script with the `path.to.build.plugin` system property.
```

>
{style="note"}

### 3. IDE life cycle management

```kotlin
.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
}
```

These two methods:

* Start the IDE instance (`runIdeWithDriver`).
* Shut down the IDE (`useDriverAndCloseIde`).

The empty lambda is used for IDE interactions (`useDriverAndCloseIde`).

> When the test is run for the first time, it may take longer than expected since it needs to download the IDE. Subsequent runs will be faster, using the cached IDE version.
>
{style="note"}

## Understanding the Test Architecture

The test can now be run and it should pass.

Integration tests operate across two separate processes:

* Test process:
    * Executes test code, sending commands to the IDE.
    * Manages the IDE life cycle.
    * Controls test flow and assertions.
* IDE process:
    * Listens and executes commands from the test process.

This dual-process architecture explains several key aspects of integration testing:

* Why debugging requires special considerations.
* The need for a communication protocol between test and IDE processes.
* Why a built plugin distribution is required.
* The origin of certain test-specific exceptions.

## Opening Projects in Tests

> While starting an IDE with an empty project is useful, sometimes we need actual projects to verify real-world scenarios. Let's modify our test to open a project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While starting the IDE with an empty project is useful, often it is required to use actual projects to verify real-world scenarios.
```

The framework supports several ways to specify test projects:

* **GitHub projects**: `GitHubProject.fromGithub( branchName = "master", "JetBrains/ij-perf-report-aggregator" )`
* **Remote archives**: `RemoteArchiveProjectInfo("https://github.com/JetBrains/intellij-community/archive/master.zip")`
* **Local projects**: `LocalProjectInfo(Path("src/test/resources/test-projects/simple-project"))`

> Here's our test modified to open a GitHub project:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to open a GitHub project:
```

```kotlin
@Test
fun simpleTest() {
  Starter.newContext(
    "testExample",
    TestCase(
      IdeProductProvider.IC,
      GitHubProject.fromGithub(branchName = "master", repoRelativeUrl = "JetBrains/ij-perf-report-aggregator")
    ).withVersion("2024.2")
  ).apply {
    val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
    PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
  }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
    waitForIndicators(5.minutes)
  }
}
```

> While simple, this test verifies a critical aspect: our plugin doesn't interfere with IDE startup.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While simple, this test verifies a critical aspect: the plugin doesn't interfere with IDE startup.
```

> > We added a call `waitForIndicators` into the lambda to make sure that we wait till all indicators are gone before exiting the IDE.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Notice a `waitForIndicators` call in the lambda.
> It ensures that the test will wait till all indicators are gone before exiting the IDE.
```

Not sure about "the test will wait". But likely it is not "we" who is waiting here.

>
{style="note"}

## Catching Exceptions from IDE

Our test has one critical limitation: it won't detect exceptions or freezes occurring within the IDE process. Let's understand why and how to fix this.

Due to the two-process architecture:

* Exceptions in the IDE process aren't automatically propagated to the test process.
* A bundled plugin collects exceptions from the IDE's `MessageBus`.
* These exceptions are stored in the error folder within the logs.

> The Starter framework uses TeamCity reporting by default, falling back to `NoCIServer` for other environments. However, we can customize this behavior using Kodein Dependency Injection. Here's how to make tests fail when IDE exceptions occur:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Starter framework uses TeamCity reporting by default, falling back to `NoCIServer` for other environments. 
However, this can be customized by using Kodein Dependency Injection.
The following example shows how to make tests fail when IDE exceptions occur:
```

```kotlin
init {
  di = DI {
    extend(di)
    bindSingleton<CIServer>(overrides = true) {
      object : CIServer by NoCIServer {
        override fun reportTestFailure(testName: String, message: String, details: String, linkToLogs: String?) {
          fail { "$testName fails: $message. \n$details" }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

In the code above:

> * We create a custom implementation of `CIServer` that extends `NoCIServer`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It binds a custom implementation of `CIServer` that extends `NoCIServer`.
```

Does it bind it in the Kodeine's context? Like in Spring? Does it override an existing bean? If so, it would be nice to be more explicit about this.

> * We override only the `reportTestFailure` method to fail the test with detailed error information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `reportTestFailure` method is overridden to fail the test with detailed error information.
```

val intTestImplementation by configurations.getting {
  extendsFrom(configurations.testImplementation.get())
}

dependencies {
  intTestImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.7.1")
  intTestImplementation("org.kodein.di:kodein-di-jvm:7.20.2")
  intTestImplementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core-jvm:1.10.1")
}

val integrationTest = task<Test>("integrationTest") {
  description = "Runs integration tests."
  group = "verification"
  testClassesDirs = sourceSets["intTest"].output.classesDirs
  classpath = sourceSets["intTest"].runtimeClasspath
  dependsOn("buildPlugin")
  systemProperty("path.to.build.plugin", tasks.buildPlugin.get().archiveFile.get().asFile.absolutePath)
  useJUnitPlatform()
}
```

The following dependencies are required:

* `testFramework(TestFrameworkType.Starter)` will add all required dependencies for writing integration tests - Starter and Driver frameworks.
* `org.kodein.di:kodein-di-jvm` is a dependency injection framework used by Starter for configuration.
* `org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core-jvm` is required for Starter framework which is implemented using Kotlin coroutines.

This configuration does the following:

> * Imports test implementation dependencies to intTest implementation dependencies

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Imports test implementation dependencies to `intTest` implementation dependencies
```

* Defines new test source roots in `src/intTest`

> * Creates a new task `integrationTest` in `verification` group

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Creates a new task `integrationTest` in the `verification` group
```

> * Makes the test task depend on `buildPlugin`, ensuring plugin is built before tests run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Makes the test task depend on `buildPlugin`, ensuring the plugin is built before tests run.
```

* To test a plugin, the Starter framework needs to know where to find the plugin distribution for installation in the IDE.
`path.to.build.plugin` system property points to the plugin distribution file.
* Enables JUnit Platform for test execution.

For more details about configuring integration tests, please refer to [Gradle docs](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_testing.html#sec:configuring_java_integration_tests).

> Note: Driver and UI components are in the experimental state and subject to API changes.
>
{style="note"}

## Creating the First Integration Test

Now that the configuration is complete, it's time to write the first integration test, which will:

* Start the IDE with the plugin installed.
* Wait for all background processes to complete.
* Perform a shutdown.

Create a new Kotlin file in `src/intTest/kotlin` with the following code:

> ```kotlin
> class PluginTest {
>   @Test
>   fun simpleTestWithoutProject() {
>     Starter.newContext(testName = "testExample", TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject).withVersion("2024.3")).apply {
>       val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
>       PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
>     }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
>     }
>   }
> }
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```kotlin
class PluginTest {
  @Test
  fun simpleTestWithoutProject() {
    Starter.newContext(
      testName = "testExample",
      TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject)
        .withVersion("2024.3")
    ).apply {
      val pathToPlugin = System.getProperty("path.to.build.plugin")
      PluginConfigurator(this).installPluginFromPath(Path(pathToPlugin))
    }.runIdeWithDriver().useDriverAndCloseIde {
    }
  }
}
```
```

We have 70 characters of width, otherwise readers have to scroll. Let's minimize it.

Let's break down each part of the test:

> ### 1. Context creation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 1. Context Creation
```

```kotlin
Starter.newContext(
  testName = "testExample",
  TestCase(IdeProductProvider.IC, projectInfo = NoProject
).withVersion("2024.3"))
```

The Context object stores IDE runtime configuration:

* IDE type (e.g., IntelliJ Community, PhpStorm, GoLand).
* IDE version (2024.3 in this example).

> * Project configuration (using NoProject for this example).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Project configuration (using `NoProject` for this example).
```

          fail { "$testName fails: $message. \n$details" }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The code above:

* Overrides a default `CIServer` object with a custom implementation.
* Provides `reportTestFailure` method which fails the test with detailed error information if any IDE exception is recorded during the test run.

This extensibility pattern can be applied to customize other aspects of the Starter framework as needed.

## Complete Example

Here's the complete test implementation that forms the foundation for future plugin testing:

```kotlin
class PluginTest {
  init {
    di = DI {
      extend(di)
      bindSingleton<CIServer>(overrides = true) {
        object : CIServer by NoCIServer {
          override fun reportTestFailure(
            testName: String,
            message: String,
            details: String,
            linkToLogs: String?
          ) {
            fail { "$testName fails: $message. \n$details" }
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
  @Test
  fun simpleTest() {
    val result = Starter.newContext(
      "testExample",
      TestCase(
        IdeProductProvider.IC,

>         GitHubProject.fromGithub(branchName = "master", repoRelativeUrl = "JetBrains/ij-perf-report-aggregator")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        GitHubProject.fromGithub(
          branchName = "master",
          repoRelativeUrl = "JetBrains/ij-perf-report-aggregator"
        )
```

To create a new task - `integrationTest`, define new test source roots - `intTest`, and add required dependencies, update the `build.gradle.kts` file:

```kotlin
dependencies {
  intellijPlatform {
    //...
    testFramework(TestFrameworkType.Starter)
  }

sourceSets {
  create("intTest") {
    compileClasspath += sourceSets.main.get().output
    runtimeClasspath += sourceSets.main.get().output
  }
}

val intTestImplementation by configurations.getting {
  extendsFrom(configurations.testImplementation.get())
}

dependencies {
  intTestImplementation("org.junit.jupiter:junit-jupiter:5.7.1")
  intTestImplementation("org.kodein.di:kodein-di-jvm:7.20.2")
  intTestImplementation("org.jetbrains.kotlinx:kotlinx-coroutines-core-jvm:1.10.1")
}

val integrationTest = task<Test>("integrationTest") {
  description = "Runs integration tests."
  group = "verification"
  testClassesDirs = sourceSets["intTest"].output.classesDirs
  classpath = sourceSets["intTest"].runtimeClasspath
  dependsOn("buildPlugin")
  systemProperty("path.to.build.plugin", tasks.buildPlugin.get().archiveFile.get().asFile.absolutePath)
  useJUnitPlatform()
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: Regarding `intTest`, I noticed the same, but it can be considered a Gradle convention as it is done like this in their docs:
https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/java_testing.html#ex-setting-up-working-integration-tests

> ```

Author: - Yes, I used the example from Gradle since there is a reference to it in the doc as well. It might be confusing if we do it slightly different.
- The suggested code doesn't work for me unfortunately, I get: `Parameter specified as non-null is null: method org.gradle.kotlin.dsl.NamedDomainObjectCollectionExtensionsKt.getValue, parameter <this>`
- If we depend on `dependsOn(tasks.prepareSandbox)`, we need to adjust our framework since right now we don't support `jar`s only `zip`s with plugin
